Memory leaks are sometimes really hard to detect,
and depending on your memory management strategy
you could limit your calls to new and delete to a narrow local scope.
This would be the smart way,
or you could distribute new and delete over your entire code base.
In this case, it might happen that delete would never be called.
If exceptional occurs somewhere, for example,
in the path of execution would never lead to delete you would have a memory leak,
and even experienced programmers often have difficulties
finding all the possible memory leaks in a project.
It takes time as well,
and next to memory this is the most precious resource which we haven't programming.
Special tools to detect memory problems such as leaks can therefore
be a smart addition to your personal programming toolbox.
Depending on the development environment,
you might already have such to install.
Xcode on Mac has one as well as Visual Studio and C on Windows.
For those who don't use these tools,
there is an alternative called Valgrind,
and with this free tool you can perform
an automated memory check and scan for leaks automatically.
At the end, you will get a nice and very convenient summary
of all potential memory leaks in your code.
Let's see how this works.
Now this example if we wanted to look at a way to detect
memory leaks and if we take a look at our main function,
we see that not much is happening there,
the only thing which we find is the location of a block of memory on the heap.
We are allocating memory for 10 integers and
the points out pInt is pointing to the first integer in this series of 10.
Actually this is a memory leak,
because we are calling new to allocate memory but there is
no call to delete here which means the memory is not deallocated.
If we would do such a thing here deallocate memory using delete pInt,
everything would be fine.
But as we are not doing this,
there is a memory leak.
The question is, can we detect this leak automatically using some kind of tool?
There's actually a whole bunch of tools out there to
detect such problems in memory and it really
comes down to the operating system which you are using as well
as to the integrated development environment,
you're using the IDE.
If you're using Visual Studio, for example,
there should be an onboard tool with which you can do this.
In our case, we are using Visual Studio Code,
there is no onboards tool,
and on my system I am running macOS.
I could use Xcode to do this,
so if you're developing on on Mac using Xcode,
you can also use appropriate tools therefore for memory check and
for performance optimization of all kinds but you could also use a free software.
Let's take a look at the website of the tool called Valgrind.
On this website, you will find a short overview of
this very powerful set of tools for detecting all kinds of memory problems.
If you look at the tool suite information for example here,
you'll actually see that there's a whole bunch of
different subtour which can be used for all kinds of detection purposes.
The only thing which we will be using is called Memcheck,
and Memcheck detects memory management problems
and it's aimed primarily at C and C++ program.
So it nicely fits the development environment as
well as the operating system and the language which we are using here.
Let's get back to our Visual Studio Code.
Now in order to use Valgrind,
you have to of course install it,
you can use the Homebrew package management
to software on if you're running Windows Mac OS,
but you can also compile it for yourselves,
you can download it from the website.
There's a whole variety of ways of installing Valgrind on your system.
I have a pre-installed on my Mac using Homebrew.
Valgrind can be fired up from the terminal,
it's done by simply typing valgrind here,
and now we have to take care to use the correct parameters.
I don't want to do a deep dive into the myriad ways in which Valgrind can be used.
We would like to find memory leaks and we would
like to find the tool just scan for all kinds of leaks.
So we're going to perform a leak check which is full.
That means you're going to look for everything.
We also want to look at all kinds of leaks which there might be,
so "show-leak-kinds=all" all kinds of leaks which there are,
we will see what this actually means when we look at the output but for now bear with me.
The next thing we want to do is we want to track the origins of the link.
So we can see in the code where they are located.
So track origin and we are saying,
"Yes please track the origins."
Then we have this parameter here on which
I'm not going into any detail at this point in time.
Then we want to take a look at the log file,
and the log file is a text file in which the result is going to be output.
In this case, I'm going to output it into the same directory where the
binary lives and I'm calling it Valgrind-out.txt.
The last thing missing here is, of course,
we need to tell the Valgrind which binary it should analyze,
and this can be done at the end and the file which I am
using here is called memory leaks debugging.cpp.
So the respective binary is also called memory leaks debugging.
Now let's execute this code and see what happens and then take a look at the output file.
There is a small error here show leaks kinds all,
it seems I have a small typo here.
Let's quickly fix that should of course be show leak kinds all not leaks kinds on.
Here we go. Let's try it one more time.
This null seem to have worked.
Let's take a look at the output of the Valgrind memory check now.